From Hansel minutes.com. It's Hanselman.
It's our weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist Scott
Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin. There's
this Lawrence Ryan and show number
62 recorded Thursday, April 19,
2007. Support for Hanselman is
provided by Tellerik already controls
the most comprehensive suite of
components for windows forms and
asp.net web applications. online@wwwdottlerik.com. Support
is also provided by slashing
software, red carpet subscriptions, the
most comprehensive solution for adding
connectivity to your.net and asp.net
applications with components for every
major internet protocol online@wwwdothensoftwaredotcomandby.net developers
journal the world's leading.net developer
magazine online at www dot
dot com. In this
episode, we continue with Scott
pre-sells discussing the past and
future of programming. There are
so many, there's so much
existing functionality in my box.
If I had some way
to list all of the
DLL calls I could make
and all of the dark
CS I could call the
command line arguments and, and
all of the calm objects
and all of the.net classes
and big surface area, it's
a huge surface area. And
so if I'm going to
navigate that surface area, I
want some help. And the
help, the thing I do
is I go, well, I'm
going to, I think in
system dot networking is something.
I want a system that
networking dot, Oh, wait, here's
the thing. And that's how
I learned. Actually, there's so
much functionality. Now, the one
thing that I have to
do is whenever I find
that function, I think I've
found that discovered that function.
I have to go see
if it's obsolete now. Oh,
we'll see. That's the beauty
of that net. It'll tell
you. Yeah, I will. Although
I have to say load
with partial name is the
most used a function called
this Mark obsolete that I've
ever seen. Well, I got
the whole game. That's a
whole other talk. We should
do a whole talk about
the loader sometime. I mean
the whole load from load
file, you know, it's like
at 90% of every little
bit of a plugin code,
I find scattered around the
bathroom wall of code. That
is the internet. Everyone is
calling assembly that load from,
and I just want to
go well and that's not
their fault. I mean, it's
our fault. It's just send
it out load from his
fault. The fault is that
that net really doesn't have
a decent plugin technology, right?
This idea provider model wasn't
built in from the very
much and unlike comm, which
has a wonderful one really
does. That was one of
the things I say that
we lost when we went
from calm to.net. And I
just sprayed just putting it
back. It's just, we haven't
yet someday pop. Okay. So
I would say that IntelliSense
was huge for me. What
happened after intelligence? So that,
so you're saying that the
last 15 years, the only
really interesting programming thing that
happened was visual programming and
intelligence. No, no. We're just
three in the list. We're
also a half an hour
into our pod. Well, that's
because poor wordy bastards. What
do you want? We are
wordy. So if you just
listen to the first five
minutes and then fast forward
to 30 minutes, Okay. We
still got to tell us
since you've got visual design
and of course calm was
the first thing by an
Eric, the concept of a
component model. Right. And so,
so I would say, so
I came up with comm,
you came up with visual
programming. I came up with
IntelliSense, it's your term list?
Yeah, that happened in the
last 15 years. So I
know I got nothing really,
so much stuff happened before
that though, that I'm thinking
to my I'm thinking garbage
collection. I don't know. Dynamic
type. No. Well, I would
absolutely say in the last
15 years, obviously not garbage
collection, but the popularization of
garbage collection, the popularization of
garbage, the reread popularization of
dynamic typing and dynamic languages.
Yeah. I don't know. I
go back and forth on
that one. I mean, it
seems like with dynamic languages,
I want some of the
capabilities, right. I want to
be able to, to have
a reflection mechanism, to find
out what I've got and
to do different things with
it. Right. And I want
to be able to walk
up to instances and add
data and behavior to them.
Right. I want, and we
want method, method missing, you
know, I guess you call
them static methods. Now in
method missing method missing is
in Ruby. I can go
and I have a person
and I could say person
dot bark and person would
not have a bark, but
I could go and make
a thing called method missing,
which is the function that
would get called whenever I
call a function that's missing.
Nice. And then I could
then have person have bark
so I can get the
person class from you, Chris,
and then call a person
and bark on it and,
and spot weld onto the
side of it. The new
method. Yeah. So that, that,
that has become amongst those
kinds of walks, that method
missing style programming is the
same kind of thing that
they do in PowerShell with
a script properties and a
script methods where you go
into your power shell XNL
file and you add methods
that don't already exist. So
for example, I've always felt
that the string class should
have a two basically Forrest
string and from basics. Now
I could derive one and
then make a, I don't
think you can, I believe
the StringClasses seals. Oh yeah,
you're right. But you know
what? I'm, I don't like
functionality in this food class.
I'm going to derive one.
So you're familiar with
extension methods static, but that
was a mistake extension. The
syntax is like a big,
a big static thing, but
it's like method missing is
extension methods in an eye
dispatching kind of a, yeah.
It's adding functionality at, so
obviously what did I just
call them extension methods or
adding it at compile time.
And that's a wonderful feature
and, you know, message method
missing right. Is a way
to do it at all.
And I want both, and
it's all the Oop purists
though, you know, the followers
of the ThoughtWorks crowd. They're
like, Oh, that's not, that's
not good. You can't, how
do you reconcile that? It's
just like the whole argument
that happened when C-sharp, didn't
include multiple inheritance. You know
what I mean? There was
a sign of little kind
of actually I know Jake
in the street when that
happened. Well, you know, but
there was like a mini
uprising, like, but what if,
what about this obscure edge
case, you know, I'm just
run into it and lightweight.
Yeah. But then you work
around it with interfaces or
whatever. I would say that
one of the things that
we've got as programmers in
the last 15 years is
the solidification of objects as
a way. Right. I would
say that there's no other
way. No, no, I wouldn't
say that. It's true at
all. I mean, you know,
there's a bunch of other
ways we've been, for example,
we've, we've been, there are
other ways, but for the
business programmer, are they gonna
pick Haskell as the thing
they're going to bet this
is just, well, sure. Yeah.
That's interesting. I can have,
we can have a whole
other talk on that too.
We'll do that next week.
Okay. But I would say
that just, just the pervasiveness
of objects as a way
of thinking about how to
program, you know, what all
the way through the tools
that the buggers and just
everything, you know, what solidified
that for me was I
put my head down somewhere
around 2003, and then I
brought it up in 2007
and realized that while I
was asleep, people had turned
JavaScript into a complete object
oriented universe and had built
whole object models to reflect
reality. And it built well,
when I, when I had
my head down, it was
methods instructs. Yup. And when
I lifted my head up,
it was a whole programming
language. And then Jeff Atwood
at coding horror has declared
the browser, the new IDE,
Oh my Lord. Yeah. I
mean, you put Firebug or
web developer toolbar or internet
developer, you know, III developer,
toolbar. And suddenly he spends
90% of his time developing
in the browser. Wow. Well,
cause he's using browser plugins
that have pains, then let
him, so he said the
browser is the new idea.
Of course the whole thing
is all dynamic. Right. So
as he makes it, it's,
it's all real, you can
see it and interact with
it. I do almost all
of my editing and style
sheet work in my blog
using the web developer toolbar.
And as I type the
CSS, the page just dynamically
updates. Wow. Wow. So, so
I think that's actually a
good segue into what the
future programming was going to.
Right. Because I think that,
you know, just the idea
of the designer as what
you see is what you
get for, for visuals. I
think we're going to, and
then the whole kind of,
that's really a graphic user
interface around this whole idea
of, I want to tell
the computer what I want
and then let it do
it right. Under declarative model.
Right, Right, right. But also
the separation before there was
this artificial and uncomfortable separation
between design view and runtime
view, asp.net, that, that team,
I think got bit by
that more than anyone because
they built in this notion
of we're going to instantiate
your page and the designer,
and we're not really going
to give it a real
to be context. So it's
not really happening. Right. And
then you had this situation
where it looked one way
and design view another now
with kind of increased dynamicism
Dynamism, dynamism Within these environments.
I think the expectation is
that what I'm looking at,
whether it be in design
view or one time is
the real view. And I
think Sam will probably be
a good example. Absolutely. Absolutely.
And, and we're seeing that
a lot in, in UI
is absolutely. And we have
for awhile ever since visual
basic one it's been there.
But I would say that
we also are getting that
when it comes to even
behavior and data. For example,
if you would imagine, look
at Excel, I'd probably start
up Excel three to five
times a day and write
an app. Right. I typed
in some numbers, I put
some relationships between those numbers.
I'd get my results and
you know, four times out
of five, I throw it
away. I've got my results.
I'd run my program. I'm
done. Right. So it's, it's,
it's electric paper for you.
All right. And you know,
one time out of five,
I'll probably save it, come
back and build up with
new data. And to the,
Here's a thought, wouldn't it
be nice if Excel word
PowerPoint? And one note, I
was thinking more specifically of
Excel in one note, really
the same application. And you
might remember, you know, and
then think about tablets, tablet,
PCs, and the sense of,
if I write a bunch
of numbers and put a
line underneath the bottom, you
should, you should some that,
and there were a lot
of tablet applications that did
that kind of stuff For
physics. There was the physical
illustration, Which is amazing. If
you haven't tried this, do
you have a tablet PC,
or you have a Wacom
tablet go and Google for
the physics illustrator, you literally
Draw balls, draw Line describing
how gravity works. I've seen
this and just say, yes,
amazing unreal. And then didn't,
they have one too for
like mathematical applications where you
could like, just write down
an equation that would figure
it out, figure it out.
Wow. At that, I mean,
electric paper is a place
that we're going actually getting
into a little bit to
use your experience. I got,
I got my F well,
it's kind of embarrassing. I
talked about it on my
blog, but a friend of
mine loaned me his copy
of dance, dance revolution, which
is something you really need
to close the, the shades.
If you know what I'm
saying, I want to know
if this is more or
less embarrassing than your predilection
for runway fashion models, Fashion,
Eastville, and a well dressed
one at that. And I'm
not ashamed. Well, I have
to say, as we're sitting
here in my office, I've
got my, my loose button
up shirt on and my,
you know, my baggy jeans
and Scott sitting here a
pair of $200 shoes on,
he does, he's sitting here
with it. I, you know,
my sleeves are rolled up.
Scott's got, it has to
be a freshly pressed shirt
on Scott. I mean, you're
looking styling and you know,
he's got the watch. And
of course the sleeves are,
you know, buttoned at the
cuffs and he's sitting there,
I'm just sitting sprawled out
on my recliner. Scott's got
his leg up and you
know, he's every once in
a while he smooth clothes
out. I don't know if
this is the kind of
thing we want to paint
the natural Sexual program. My
wife likes me though. And
that's all it matters. There
you go. My point about
dance, dance revolution was that
I haven't picked up the
controller that my X-Box intended
me to use in weeks.
It's guitar hero, it's dance,
dance revolution, you know, it's
the remote control. Sure. It's
the media center PC a
wireless keyboard. Oh, you have
one of those that it's
fantastic. These are all alternative
ways to interact with my
system. And I speculate on
my blog a while ago
that bill Gates is spending
all this money on voice.
And unless you have the
greatest computer in the history
of the universe, voice and
Vista is a lot of
like saying something and then
saying it again. Really? Have
you tried it? You tried
it. Run calculator. Hope run,
run cap. No, no run
calculator, Computer, computer, computer. I
wonder if we should talk
about liquid aluminum as something?
Yeah. Star Trek for voyage
home reference. Thank you very
much. My point being though
that, what do we have?
Sorry. Transparent. Aluminum had got
the Heron. I totally got
the reference wrong. Sorry about
that. That's okay. It was
an, actually, it was an
Apple se he was using
this And he picked up
the mouse, the mouse James
doing, we had the knee.
Yes. My point was that
we've got all these new
ways. They're trying to have
us interact with the computer.
They're are very expensive tablet,
PC voice, which causes a
lot of CPU. And it's
very productive, very problematic, but
we've got these $30 webcams.
You've got an Xbox live
cam V extra fly vision
camera on top of your
big screen TV and the
extra room there. I do.
I use it and I
use it for video conferences
with my team. Why aren't
you gesturing a minority report
style? Oh, Cause I do
gesture at my computer. You
do Rather than wearing gloves,
kind of, you know, why
aren't we tracking our hands?
My point being that like
giving the example of like
Vista, if you've got three,
four windows on the screen
at once and you want
to pick one up and
push it to another monitor.
Sure. You can pick the
tiny, tiny area, surface area
of the title bar and
drag it. You can Altspace
em, and then move it
with the keyboard, which I'm
sure you do. You're not.
Yes. Do. But there's only
four windows there. Why can't
my web cam see my
hand and glean my intent
to move those four windows
just as voice recognition can
narrow down the number of
things that I could possibly
intend to say a hand
gesture recognition system, all on
minority report could glean that
he clearly has just reached
out, clenched his hand. And
as if you were grabbing
something, there's only four things
he could want to do.
He wanted to lose one
of these four windows. So
you're, you're actually talking about
almost what the we has
done with our controller without
the controller. Yes. I'm saying
that that whoever solves that
problem is going to have
a license to print money.
And have you, Have you
seen these amazing demonstrations of
this guy with this LCD
panel? Daniel Hahn? Yes. This is
yes. And he did. He
reaches in with all his
fingers and he just does
these amazing manipulations, $3,000. I
propose that problem can be
solved with a $30 webcam,
some really good stuff. So,
you know, there, there are
tons of research people and
I'm sure I, I'm not
positive. I'm sure that, But
they're not working on it
in that, in that 10
years ago, bill Gates announced
that voice and pens were
the way of the future.
And they're just not quite
there yet. They're baked into
ultimate, but they're still niche.
I would say, I fully
agree with that. And I
actually had a tablet for
a while because I wanted
this experience. And what I
found was that a tablet
was wonderful. Once you have
the document in front of
you, that you wanted to
read a markup, but getting
there was impossible without the
keyboard, At least for me.
Yeah. I tried writing the
first draft of the asp.net
chapters. I wrote for the
ASP to net book a
totally a tablet. I have
this kind of like, all
right, I'm going to go
With the cafe and have
a coffee. Well, I wrote
a page and then I
bought a copy of dragon
naturally speaking. Well, that's actually
supposed to be really cool.
It's actually very good. It's
a lot better than they
missed it. And there's a
new Vista version for it
too. Yeah. But the quality
of the microphone you need
is so immense, you need
a hundred dollar microphone. Wow.
Really? Wow. Really? Yeah. You,
you need a condenser mic
and you know, the nice
news spectrum, Mike, you need
something quality. You can't just
put a headphone on and
start spitting into the sea.
This is the basic problem
I had with entering content
into my tablet. I have
terrible handwriting. Right. So we
needed the high quality handwriting
input mechanism other than me.
And that was the problem.
Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. So, so,
so the, the Kind of
a minority report UI thing
you were talking, It has
a general purpose use Back
around for future developers. I
think we get more kind
of Wiziwig with not just
UI, but actual data bringing
back around the Excel reference
where I, where if I
do a database. Yeah. I
actually see the data. It
was a tech tech ready
tech Fest. I wasn't, there
was a thing at Microsoft
where Rory did a bunch
of stuff on this on
channel nine where it was
all the research people that
are kind of research fellow.
And they had been there
several times. So I had
this kind of rubbery, graphical
view thing where it was
basically like charts within, you
know, data binding and charting,
except the data points didn't
they actually transitioned with animation.
So you would turn a
bar chart into a pie
chart and they, they, they
did all the tweening, the
onion skinning, you know, dynamically
such that if this bar
represents this data point, then
you can see it during
the transition, stay that bar
start to morph into a
piece of a pie. Wow.
So you can watch, this
is okay. I know where
this data is in this
graph. And now I'm going
to see where it is
and this other graph, and
hopefully the different visualizations would
give me better understanding my
name. It gives you context.
So the actual animation itself
is providing you data as
a, as an analyst. And
that's, I mean, the Xerox
guys knew this, right? That
it's terrible to just blink
new images at you and
have no transition. It's only,
now that we've really got
kind of in general availability
computer hardware that can actually
do this. Interesting. That's the
one thing about Vista that
I miss when I go
back to XP is the
little kind of subtle squish
thing that you start when
you minimize the window. The
thing that blew us away
so many years ago in
the OSX, the genie effect,
I gave my dad a
Mac last week and he
loves that stuff and it's
just, Oh, it's there now
look, it's still going. The
video is still running in
the, in the thumbnail. So
I would say that for
me, the big things going
forward that I see now,
15 years is a hell
of a long time, but
I would say more and
more declarative, which we brought
up a little bit. And
certainly when we talk to
UI designing and, and data
designing and, and you know,
the Excel style, that's all
very declarative, right? Here's how
I want this stuff to
relate. And I would say
that, you know, direct manipulation
of things, right. Visual right
now, that kind of the
biggest thing we've got for
programmers is a few designers
and code. And if we
can get to more declarative
coding styles, and if we
can get to kind of
domain specific designers, and if
we could even go crazy
with these, you know, data
gloves or, you know, $30
cameras watching my gestures so
I can manipulate the data
or the definitions of that
data or the interactions that
you're saying. I think that
it's the end of the
model three, the whole data,
here's the view. And here's
the data, Right? It's all
tickets, just the same thing.
Yeah. And in fact, I
can imagine, you know, today
I sit down and write
an Excel app and get
the results I want and
throw it away tomorrow, sitting
down And writing a real
app with a tree view,
with a list view and
data really bound in real
time, getting the result I
want and throwing it away
because it's that fast. Well,
I would, I would actually
extend that in one of
my things would be true.
Location, transparency, not in the
object you way, but in
the application way. Right now,
Google is off trying to
make Google PowerPoint. Right? Sure.
For sure. And that's just,
there are two kinds of
apps. Now there's ones that
run on your machine and
there's ones that run on
the server. Right. And I
think that we're going to
blur that so much, that
there's not going to be
a way to really put
your finger on where this
thing's running. So I would
say that flash was an
attempt at that. A jacket
is an attempt to follow
his attempt. I look at
Silverlight is a big attempt
at that. Absolutely. Right. To
be able to merge the
benefits of the multiple platforms,
doing the work. There's really
no way to tell what
their Silverlight application right. Where
the calculation is occurring. Right.
Right. And that's probably okay.
Oh, absolutely. So long as
it happens, I don't really
care where I want to
know when the windowing interface
is going to be done.
What do you mean? Well,
right now, the closest thing
we've done in this that
are really blowing people's minds,
as far as fundamentally challenging
metaphors is like flip 3d
and those kinds of things,
you know, when he introduced
us three D space, but
it doesn't actually provide any
value. It doesn't probably any
data. Oh, look a Z
axis. Yay. But is it
all just is, is, is
the human brain hard wired
for pointers and icons and
windows? Oh, clearly got to
be a different metaphor. I
agree with that. And I
know that a ton of
people have spent time with
this, but even, so if
you look at, you know,
the guy who's been doing
the cool interaction stuff, like
he's got a table full
of pictures that he's rearranging
and resizing and they're squares
with stuff in them. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. On the other
hand, he's got a, a
three D map view. Yeah.
So, you know, he's starting
to get it. They're starting
to get into the three
D you see the, build
your own glove to manipulate
Google earth. Basically you buy
a pair of gloves and
you paint the fingers of
them. You hook up a
camera and he will detect
your fingers based on the
color and allow you to
manipulate the Google or home
man that rocks. So declarative
direct manipulation of data, as
well as UI and domain
specific languages. I see. Or
domain specific editors and even
crazy stuff like, you know,
direct manipulation with hand gestures
and voice. And I see
those as big things coming.
Cool. Maybe I'll see you
again in a couple weeks.
Absolutely happy to have you
here. Thanks you guys for
listening to us babble and
in the office of presales,
and this has been another
episode of Hansel minutes.